Let me explain the difference between "I used to" and "I am
used to".
Let's start with "I used to". In English, we say "I used to
do something" when we're talking about something we did on a
regular basis in the past. For example, "I used to play
saxophone when I was a kid", which means "When I was a kid
for many months or many years, most likely, I played the
saxophone on a regular basis or consistently. It wasn't once
or twice, and then I never did it again. It was for a long
period of time on a regular basis." Okay, so here's another
example. "We used to go to our grandma's house every
summer", which most likely means when you were a kid for
many, many years, five, ten, 15 years, every single summer,
you and your siblings, your family would go to your
grandma's house. It wasn't just one summer. It was
consistently summer after summer after summer. Now you don't
do it anymore. But in the past you used to do it, okay? You
did it on a regular basis. That's the idea. So here's
another example. "He used to be the best player in the
world." "He used to be the best player in the world", which
means at one point in time, in the past, for a long period
of time, he was the best. From 1995 to 2010 or
something like that, he was the best. It's 2021 now. So he
"used to be", right? There was this large period of time
where he was the best or he used to be the best, but he's
not anymore. One more example. Just to make it even more
clear, you will hear many times somebody might say something
like, "I used to smoke." "I used to smoke, but I don't
anymore", which means "On a regular basis for a long time I
was a smoker. I smoked a lot." You know? "I don't anymore,
though." You can say "I smoked", but that just implies that
you did it at one time. But if you say "I used to smoke", it
means that it was in the past. It was a habit for you. You
did it all the time, consistently, but you don't anymore.
Alright? Now let me talk about the grammar for this phrase.
"I used to do something". In this case, you're always going
to say "I used to" plus the infinitive form of the verb. For
example, "I used to play". You don't say "I used to
playing", that's grammatically incorrect or another example,
"We used to go to our grandma's house." We do not say, "We
used to going to our grandma's house" or "I used to smoke."
You don't say, "I used to smoking." So in this case,
something that you used to do in the past, you're always
going to use the infinitive form of the verb. "I used to
smoke", "I used to play", "I used to drink", "I used to go"
every single time. Don't use the gerund form or the -i-n-g
form with this phrase in particular. Now let's move on to "I
am used to", which is something completely different. So we
say "I am used to" when we're talking about something that
is normal for us or something that we are accustomed to and
to say, "I am used to something", the way I understand it is
the same thing as saying "I am accustomed to something." So
maybe if you speak a lot in base language, you can recognize
that word "accustomed" because it exists in your language.
So a more natural, let's say, modern way to say that, less
formal way to say that in American English is "to be used
to". We don't say...it's not so common to say, "I am
accustomed to this." There's nothing wrong with that, if you
want to say that, but it's just much more informal and
natural to say, "I'm used to this." Alright? So let me give
you some examples. Number one, "I'm used to waking up
early." "I'm used to waking up early", which basically means
"I am accustomed to the habit of waking up early. It is
normal for me now. Maybe in the past it was very difficult
for me to wake up in the morning. I'm not a morning person.
I'm not somebody that likes waking up early in the morning.
I'm not somebody that naturally wakes up early in the
morning. But after doing it day after day after day, for
weeks or months or years, now I'm used to it. Now I'm
accustomed. Now it's normal for me. It's no big deal."
Alright? Another example. "It's okay. I'm used to being
underestimated." "It's okay.
I'm used to being underestimated", which means, again, "It's
normal for me now. It's nothing new for me to be
underestimated. Everyone is always underestimating me so
it's not a problem anymore. I'm used to it. It's normal. No
big deal." Another example. "Eventually, you'll get used to
the way we do things around here." "Eventually you'll get
used to the way we do things around here." So basically what
I'm saying is "Eventually, at some point, the way we do
things around here will be normal for you. It's not right
now. But after doing it for so much time, day after day
after day, you will get accustomed to it. It will be normal
for you. It will just become second nature." Let's say it
like that. Now let's talk about the grammar for this phrase
"to be used to something". So when we say "I am used to...da
da da", normally, we're gonna use a verb or a noun, used to
doing something or used to this particular thing. So if
you're using a verb with this phrase, you are always going
to use the gerund form of the verb or the -i-n-g form of the
verb. For example, "I'm used to waking up early in the
morning." You wouldn't say, "I'm used to wake up early in
the morning." Or like the other example, "I'm used to being
underestimated." You wouldn't say, "I'm used to be
underestimated." So just remember, if you're saying "I'm
used to doing something", some type of verb or action,
you're going to use the gerund, the -i-n-g form. Now, if
you're using a noun, you are always going to say, "I'm used
to the..." plus the noun.
For example, "You will get used to the way we do things
around here", so "you will get used to" plus "the" and the
noun in this case is "way", "the way". "You will get used to
the way we do things around here." "I will get used to the
weather." "I will get used to the way people speak."
Hopefully you get the idea. So if it's "I'm used to" plus
the gerund form of a verb, or "I'm used to" plus "the" and
then the noun. Alright, my friend. Now, the difference
between the two phrases "I used to" and "I am used to"
should be clear in your mind. But like I always say, if it's
not, leave your comments below if you're watching this on
YouTube or shoot me a message if you're just listening to
this somewhere and I'll try to clear up any doubts that you
still have. Alright? That's Coffee with Kaizen #11 in the
books. I'll talk to you later. Peace!